.. highlight:: shell

============
Contributing
============

Contributions are welcome, and they are greatly appreciated! Every little bit
helps, and credit will always be given.

You can contribute in many ways:

Types of Contributions
----------------------

Report Bugs
~~~~~~~~~~~

Report bugs at https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran/issues.

If you are reporting a bug, please include:

*   Your operating system name and version.
*   Any details about your local setup that might be helpful in troubleshooting.
*   Detailed steps to reproduce the bug.

Fix Bugs
~~~~~~~~

Look through the GitHub issues for bugs. Anything tagged with "bug" and "help
wanted" is open to whoever wants to implement it.

Implement Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look through the GitHub issues for features. Anything tagged with "enhancement"
and "help wanted" is open to whoever wants to implement it.

Write Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

pyglotaran could always use more documentation, whether as part of the
official pyglotaran docs, in docstrings, or even on the web in blog posts,
articles, and such.
If you are writing docstrings please use the
`NumPyDoc <https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example.html>`_
style to write them.

Submit Feedback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The best way to send feedback is to file an issue at https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran/issues.

If you are proposing a feature:

*   Explain in detail how it would work.
*   Keep the scope as narrow as possible, to make it easier to implement.
*   Remember that this is a volunteer-driven project, and that contributions
    are welcome :)

Get Started!
------------

Ready to contribute? Here's how to set up ``pyglotaran`` for local development.

1.  Fork the ``pyglotaran`` repo on GitHub.
2.  Clone your fork locally::

        $ git clone https://github.com/<your_name_here>/pyglotaran.git

3.  Install your local copy into a virtualenv. Assuming you have
    `virtualenvwrapper <https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_
    installed, this is how you set up your fork for local development::

        $ mkvirtualenv pyglotaran
        (pyglotaran)$ cd pyglotaran
        (pyglotaran)$ python -m pip install -r requirements_dev.txt
        (pyglotaran)$ pip install -e . --process-dependency-links

4.  Install the ``pre-commit`` hooks, to automatically format and check your code::

    $ pre-commit install

5.  Create a branch for local development::

        $ git checkout -b name-of-your-bugfix-or-feature

    Now you can make your changes locally.

6.  When you're done making changes, check that your changes pass flake8 and the
    tests, including testing other Python versions with tox::

        $ pre-commit run -a
        $ py.test

    Or to run all at once::

        $ tox


7.  Commit your changes and push your branch to GitHub::

        $ git add .
        $ git commit -m "Your detailed description of your changes."
        $ git push origin name-of-your-bugfix-or-feature

8.  Submit a pull request through the GitHub website.

.. note::
    By default pull requests will use the template located at ``.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md``.
    But we also provide custom tailored templates located inside of ``.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE``.
    Sadly the GitHub Web Interface doesn't provide an easy way to select them as it does for issue templates
    (`see this comment for more details <https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran/pull/692#issuecomment-856960802>`_).

    To use them you need to add the following query parameters to the url when creating the pull request and hit enter:

    - ✨ Feature PR: ``?expand=1&template=feature_PR.md``
    - 🩹 Bug Fix PR: ``?expand=1&template=bug_fix_PR``
    - 📚 Documentation PR: ``?expand=1&template=docs_PR.md``



Pull Request Guidelines
-----------------------

Before you submit a pull request, check that it meets these guidelines:

1.  The pull request should include tests.
2.  If the pull request adds functionality, the docs should be updated. Put
    your new functionality into a function with a `docstring`_.
3.  The pull request should work for Python 3.8 and 3.9
    Check your Github Actions ``https://github.com/<your_name_here>/pyglotaran/actions``
    and make sure that the tests pass for all supported Python versions.

.. _docstring:

Docstrings
----------

We use `numpy style docstrings <https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example.html>`_,
which can also be autogenerated from function/method signatures by extensions for your editor.

Some extensions for popular editors are:

* `autodocstring (VS-Code) <https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=njpwerner.autodocstring>`_
* `vim-python-docstring (Vim) <https://github.com/pixelneo/vim-python-docstring>`_

.. note::
    If your pull request improves the docstring coverage (check ``pre-commit run -a interrogate``),
    please raise the value of the interrogate setting ``fail-under`` in
    `pyproject.toml <https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran/blob/master/pyproject.toml#L31>`_.
    That way the next person will improve the docstring coverage as well and
    everyone can enjoy a better documentation.

.. warning::

    As soon as all our docstrings are in proper shape we will enforce that it stays that way.
    If you want to check if your docstrings are fine you can use `pydocstyle <https://github.com/PyCQA/pydocstyle>`_
    and `darglint <https://github.com/terrencepreilly/darglint>`_.

Tips
----

To run a subset of tests::

    $ py.test tests.test_pyglotaran


Deprecations
------------

Only maintainers are allowed to decide about deprecations, thus you should first open an
issue and check back with them if they are ok with deprecating something.

To make deprecations as robust as possible and give users all needed information
to adjust their code, we provide helper functions inside the module
:mod:`glotaran.deprecation`.

.. currentmodule:: glotaran.deprecation.deprecation_utils

The functions you most likely want to use are

*   :func:`deprecate` for functions, methods and classes
*   :func:`warn_deprecated` for call arguments
*   :func:`deprecate_module_attribute` for module attributes
*   :func:`deprecate_submodule` for modules
*   :func:`deprecate_dict_entry` for dict entries
*   :func:`raise_deprecation_error` if the original behavior cannot be maintained


Those functions not only make it easier to deprecate something, but they also check that
that deprecations will be removed when they are due and that at least the imports in the
warning work. Thus all deprecations need to be tested.

Tests for deprecations should be placed in ``glotaran/deprecation/modules/test`` which also
provides the test helper functions ``deprecation_warning_on_call_test_helper`` and
``changed_import_test_warn``.
Since the tests for deprecation are mainly for maintainability and not to test the
functionality (those tests should be in the appropriate place)
``deprecation_warning_on_call_test_helper`` will by default just test that a
``GlotaranApiDeprecationWarning`` was raised and ignore all raise ``Exception`` s.
An exception to this rule is when adding back removed functionality
(which shouldn't happen in the first place but might), which should be
implemented in a file under ``glotaran/deprecation/modules`` and filenames should be like the
relative import path from glotaran root, but with ``_`` instead of ``.``.

E.g. ``glotaran.analysis.scheme`` would map to ``analysis_scheme.py``

The only exceptions to this rule are the root ``__init__.py`` which
is named ``glotaran_root.py`` and testing changed imports which should
be placed in ``test_changed_imports.py``.


Deprecating a Function, method or class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Deprecating a function, method or class is as easy as adding the ``deprecate``
decorator to it. Other decorators (e.g. ``@staticmethod`` or ``@classmethod``)
should be placed both ``deprecate`` in order to work.

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: glotaran/some_module.py

    from glotaran.deprecation import deprecate

    @deprecate(
        deprecated_qual_name_usage="glotaran.some_module.function_to_deprecate(filename)",
        new_qual_name_usage='glotaran.some_module.new_function(filename, format_name="legacy")',
        to_be_removed_in_version="0.6.0",
    )
    def function_to_deprecate(*args, **kwargs):
        ...

Deprecating a call argument
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deprecating a call argument you should use ``warn_deprecated`` and set
the argument to deprecate to a default value (e.g. ``"deprecated"``) to check against.
Note that for this use case we need to set ``check_qual_names=(False, False)`` which
will deactivate the import testing.
This might not always be possible, e.g. if the argument is positional only,
so it might make more sense to deprecate the whole callable, just discuss what to
do with our trusted maintainers.

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: glotaran/some_module.py

    from glotaran.deprecation import deprecate

    def function_to_deprecate(args1, new_arg="new_default_behavior", deprecated_arg="deprecated", **kwargs):
        if deprecated_arg != "deprecated":
            warn_deprecated(
                deprecated_qual_name_usage="deprecated_arg",
                new_qual_name_usage='new_arg="legacy"',
                to_be_removed_in_version="0.6.0",
                check_qual_names=(False, False)
            )
            new_arg = "legacy"
        ...


Deprecating a module attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes it might be necessary to remove an attribute (function, class, or constant)
from a module to prevent circular imports or just to streamline the API.
In those cases you would use ``deprecate_module_attribute`` inside a module ``__getattr__``
function definition. This will import the attribute from the new location and return it when
an import or use is requested.

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: glotaran/old_package/__init__.py


    def __getattr__(attribute_name: str):
        from glotaran.deprecation import deprecate_module_attribute

        if attribute_name == "deprecated_attribute":
            return deprecate_module_attribute(
                deprecated_qual_name="glotaran.old_package.deprecated_attribute",
                new_qual_name="glotaran.new_package.new_attribute_name",
                to_be_removed_in_version="0.6.0",
            )

        raise AttributeError(f"module {__name__} has no attribute {attribute_name}")


Deprecating a submodule
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For a better logical structure, it might be needed to move modules to a different
location in the project. In those cases, you would use ``deprecate_submodule``,
which imports the module from the new location, add it to ``sys.modules`` and
as an attribute to the parent package.


.. code-block:: python
    :caption: glotaran/old_package/__init__.py

    from glotaran.deprecation import deprecate_submodule

    module_name = deprecate_submodule(
        deprecated_module_name="glotaran.old_package.module_name",
        new_module_name="glotaran.new_package.new_module_name",
        to_be_removed_in_version="0.6.0",
    )


Deprecating dict entries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The possible dict deprecation actions are:

- Swapping of keys ``{"foo": 1} -> {"bar": 1}`` (done via ``swap_keys=("foo", "bar")``)
- Replacing of matching values ``{"foo": 1} -> {"foo": 2}`` (done via ``replace_rules=({"foo": 1}, {"foo": 2})``)
- Replacing of matching values and swapping of keys ``{"foo": 1} -> {"bar": 2}`` (done via ``replace_rules=({"foo": 1}, {"bar": 2})``)

For full examples have a look at the examples from the docstring (:func:`deprecate_dict_entry`).


Deprecation Errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In some cases deprecations cannot have a replacement with the original behavior maintained.
This will be mostly the case when at this point in time and in the object hierarchy there isn't
enough information available to calculate the appropriate values.
Rather than using a 'dummy' value not to break the API, which could cause undefined behavior
down the line, those cases should throw an error which informs the users about the new usage.
In general this should only be used if it is unavoidable due to massive refactoring of the
internal structure and tried to avoid by any means in a reasonable context.

If you have one of those rare cases you can use :func:`raise_deprecation_error`.


Testing Result consistency
--------------------------
To test the consistency of results  locally you need to clone the
`pyglotaran-examples <https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran-examples>`_
and run them::

    $ git clone https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran-examples
    $ cd pyglotaran-examples
    $ python scripts/run_examples.py run-all --headless

.. note::
    Make sure you got the the latest version (``git pull``) and are
    on the correct branch for both ``pyglotaran`` and ``pyglotaran-examples``.

The results from the examples will be saved in you home folder under ``pyglotaran_examples_results``.
Those results than will be compared to the 'gold standard' defined by the maintainers.

To test the result consistency run::

    $ pytest .github/test_result_consistency.py

If needed this will clone the `'gold standard' results <https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran-examples/tree/comparison-results>`_
to the folder ``comparison-results``, update them and test your current results against them.


Deploying
---------

A reminder for the maintainers on how to deploy.
Make sure all your changes are committed (including an entry in HISTORY.rst),
the version number only needs to be changed in ``glotaran/__init__.py``.

Then make a `new release on GitHub <https://github.com/glotaran/pyglotaran/releases/new>`_ and
give the tag a proper name, e.g. ``0.3.0`` since might be included in a citation.

Github Actions will then deploy to PyPI if the tests pass.
